README.md, before:

[![DOI](https://zenodo.org/badge/133041124.svg)](https://zenodo.org/badge/latestdoi/133041124)

## CP2K Scanning Probe Microscopy tools

Library and scripts to perform scanning probe microscopy simulations based on a [CP2K](https://www.cp2k.org/) calculation.

Features include:

- Processing the various output files of [CP2K](https://www.cp2k.org/), including the `.wfn` file
- Scanning Tunnelling Microscopy and Spectroscopy (STM/STS) analysis
- Fourier-Transformed STS analysis for finite cutouts of periodic systems
- Orbital hybridization analysis for adsorbed systems
- High-resolution STM (HRSTM) simulations

Requirements:

- numerical and scientific python libraries `numpy`, `scipy`
- Atomistic simulation environment `ase`
- `mpi4py` provides MPI parallelization

Installation:

- `mpi4py` requires an external MPI implementation (e.g. `mpich`) available. One can install it together with `mpi4py` with
  ```bash
  conda install -c conda-forge mpi4py mpich
  ```
- the rest of the dependencies can be installed with pip
  ```bash
  git clone git@github.com:nanotech-empa/cp2k-spm-tools.git
  cd cp2k-spm-tools
  pip install .
  ```

When everything is set up correctly, the bash scripts in `examples/` folder can be executed without any further input and illustrate the usage of the various scripts. For example `example/benzene_stm/run_stm_sts_from_wfn.sh` evaluates the STM/STS signatures of isolated benzene at each orbital energy (`out/orb/`) as well as in an arbitrary energy range (`out/stm/`). The corresponding CP2K calculation is included in the repository.

**NB: In all cases, the underlying DFT calculation has to be performed with the diagonalization algorithm rather than orbital transformation (OT).**

### Evaluating molecular orbitals on an arbitrary grid

Most of the functionality of this library is built on top of the possibility to evaluate the Kohn-Sham orbitals encoded in the `.wfn` file on an arbitrarily defined grid. This is illustrated by the following script applied for a nanographene adsorbed on a Au(111) slab (total of 1252 atoms and 10512 electrons):

```python
from cp2k_spm_tools.cp2k_grid_orbitals import Cp2kGridOrbitals

### Create the gridding object and load the cp2k data ###
cgo = Cp2kGridOrbitals()
cgo.read_cp2k_input("./cp2k.inp")
cgo.read_xyz("./geom.xyz")
cgo.read_basis_functions("./BASIS_MOLOPT")
cgo.load_restart_wfn_file("./PROJ-RESTART.wfn", n_occ=2, n_virt=2)

### Evaluate the orbitals in the specific region ###
cgo.calc_morbs_in_region(
    dr_guess = 0.15,                          # grid spacing
    x_eval_region = None,                     # take whole cell in x
    y_eval_region = [0.0, cgo.cell_ang[1]/2], # half cell in y
    z_eval_region = [19.0, 24.0],             # around the molecule in z
)

cgo.write_cube("./homo.cube", orbital_nr=0)
```

The evaluated HOMO orbital in the defined region:

<img src="examples/example.png" width="600">

Commit message:

Add CLI and create a PyPi package (#15)
* Create a PyPi package (#2)

* Refactor package to add CLI

* Update .gitignore

* Add missing sub-package

* Refactor readme

* Fix ruff errors

* Define global variable at module-level

README.md, after:

[![DOI](https://zenodo.org/badge/133041124.svg)](https://zenodo.org/badge/latestdoi/133041124)

## CP2K Scanning Probe Microscopy tools

Library and scripts to perform scanning probe microscopy simulations based on a [CP2K](https://www.cp2k.org/) calculation.

Features include:

- Processing the various output files of [CP2K](https://www.cp2k.org/), including the `.wfn` file
- Scanning Tunnelling Microscopy and Spectroscopy (STM/STS) analysis
- Fourier-Transformed STS analysis for finite cutouts of periodic systems
- Orbital hybridization analysis for adsorbed systems
- High-resolution STM (HRSTM) simulations

### Installation

The package requires an MPI implementation to be available on your system for `mpi4py`. You can install it:

- On Linux: through your package manager (e.g., `apt install mpich` or `yum install mpich`)
- On macOS: through Homebrew (`brew install mpich`)
- On Windows: through conda (`conda install -c conda-forge mpich`)

Then install the package with pip:
```bash
pip install cp2k-spm-tools
```

Or, for development:
```bash
git clone https://github.com/nanotech-empa/cp2k-spm-tools.git
cd cp2k-spm-tools
pip install -e .[dev]
```

### Command Line Tools

The package provides several command-line tools, including:

- `cp2k-stm-sts-wfn`: STM/STS analysis from wavefunction files
- `cp2k-cube-from-wfn`: Create cube files from wavefunction files
- `cp2k-bader-bond-order`: Bond order analysis based on Bader basins

Use `--help` with each command to see its options.

### Example Usage

When everything is set up correctly, the bash scripts in `examples/` folder can be executed without any further input and illustrate the usage of the various scripts. For example `example/benzene_stm/run_stm_sts_from_wfn.sh` evaluates the STM/STS signatures of isolated benzene at each orbital energy (`out/orb/`) as well as in an arbitrary energy range (`out/stm/`). The corresponding CP2K calculation is included in the repository.

**NB: In all cases, the underlying DFT calculation has to be performed with the diagonalization algorithm rather than orbital transformation (OT).**

### Python API Example

Most of the functionality of this library is built on top of the possibility to evaluate the Kohn-Sham orbitals encoded in the `.wfn` file on an arbitrarily defined grid. This is illustrated by the following script applied for a nanographene adsorbed on a Au(111) slab (total of 1252 atoms and 10512 electrons):

```python
from cp2k_spm_tools.cp2k_grid_orbitals import Cp2kGridOrbitals

### Create the gridding object and load the cp2k data ###
cgo = Cp2kGridOrbitals()
cgo.read_cp2k_input("./cp2k.inp")
cgo.read_xyz("./geom.xyz")
cgo.read_basis_functions("./BASIS_MOLOPT")
cgo.load_restart_wfn_file("./PROJ-RESTART.wfn", n_occ=2, n_virt=2)

### Evaluate the orbitals in the specific region ###
cgo.calc_morbs_in_region(
    dr_guess = 0.15,                          # grid spacing
    x_eval_region = None,                     # take whole cell in x
    y_eval_region = [0.0, cgo.cell_ang[1]/2], # half cell in y
    z_eval_region = [19.0, 24.0],             # around the molecule in z
)

cgo.write_cube("./homo.cube", orbital_nr=0)
```
